okay this is a town of Andover special
town meeting for Thursday August 1st the
electors and citizens qualified to vote
in town meetings in the town of and over
are hereby notified that a special town
meeting will be held in the town office
building community room and our first
order of business is to choose a
moderator meting any any
nominations nomin W do we have a second
Nom second over there Bob hambur so
Donley Nom all those in favor
any item number two to see if the town
will approve the receip of Grant of
$83,000 for the fiscal year 2024
2025 Department of energy and
Environmental Protection recreational
Trails program requiring a town match of
$21,000 from the town multiuse building
fund to fund the design of a pathway
between the municipal complex and the
Hop River Trail through town-owned land
at this point I'm going to turn it over
to Eric Anderson presentation on all
right folks can everybody hear me yes
okay so we're going to Jeff says I have
four minutes to do this so I will go
quickly probably take more than four
okay so our church requires us to go to
special meeting anytime we as a town
accept a grant that's the grant is more
than
$2500 and there's any Town contribution
even Public Works doing a little road
work um it has to go to town meeting so
that's what we're here
for so I applied for D wck Trails Grant
this spring the goal of this was to
design an improv Percy cook Trail so uh
we as many of you know we last year we
got a legislative appropriation of
$100,000 to figure out where the trails
should go and how it should work here um
so out of that came a desire for two
Pathways one going down Route 316 and
connecting to rail trail and a second
one going through town property which
combined make about a 2 Mile Loop so uh
we tried to fund both of them with
different mechanisms we went through a
program called lsip to fund the pathway
down Route 316 we did get a $2.9 million
lots of grant for the construction of
that and that is in final design right
now in fact you might seen the guys
surveying on Route 316 still going to be
a few years out still a lot more
Outreach to the homeowners that needs to
happen finalize design work with do back
to the homeowners so it's not happening
instantaneously the second half of this
was a pathway that runs back through
town property and also connects to the
trail so we applied to
d uh for the design funding and the
reason I did that was in in the last
four or five funding segments D has been
much more likely to fund design studies
and then a year or two later fund
construction so that's the Rope we took
with that this is the fourth time I've
applied to this program for funding and
the first time we got it so defa
committed $83,500 for the design the
town matches
21,000 which will come from the
multi-use building fund so it won't be
additional taxation it's money we've
already put away uh you know for
construction
projects so this is just kind of a
summary of that for the Percy cook Trail
the study we completed the initial study
using 100% legislative grant funding um
now we're at the design
permitting uh you know and so we're
funding that 80% with State wck Trails
Grant and 20% from the town um we're
looking to get the study going sometime
middle to end of August we've already
gone to RFP for the contractor that's or
the engineering firm that's doing the
design for both this part and this part
so we don't need to Rego out to RFP and
the location is the area between here
and the Hop River Trail I'll show you
mapping in a
second so here's a breakdown of the cost
estimate the top part is everything
we're doing now
um so the bottom half is just a real you
know one over the world estimate for the
actual construction so this would be if
it ever got actually built would be
somewhere around a million dollar
project um and obviously we're not going
to do that unless we have that
funded so uh this is the overall plan
let me zoom in on that this is what
we're talking about so here we're in the
lower corner where it says Community
Center and the red line is the existing
outline of the Percy cook Trail which
follows the Old Logging Trail for the
last time that property got logged the
problem is you see all those little
lines up there that's really steep
Contour so the town hall is about 380 ft
in elevation it rises up to about 490 ft
and then it drops back down down to
about 330 ft so there's a lot of up and
a lot of down there so the hard park has
been coming up with the design which
gets down below the 10% grade level so
that it's actually walkable and bikable
um and you know it meets current
uh you know so we've done an initial
look at this using RAR data uh in the
existing mapping that the town has and
the next stage is to go back there
and to survey it you know do core
samples of the earth so you know what
you're looking at and design the actual
pathway so that's what this grant is
designed to do is get us up to a final
design how they make that route uh go
through and if we go back one slide you
can see in green that is roughly the
path that will be taken by the uh second
trail that will run down 3
so you can see from where we are here
that gives you roughly a two 2 m loop
trail from this location um where you
don't have to worry about cars other
than a little bit on Cyber m road so
that is basically what we're applying to
do um and obviously it takes a town
meeting to approve that funding so at
this point I know I went through that
pretty quick but I'm happy to answer any
questions that you all have
this is putting up against the school
property what is this right
topail so the top of the trail will run
rough it will stay on it will stay off
the partiel that's quote unquote school
property but it will run fairly close to
it yes so is there any what does the
school board said about this
so the P the person cook is the one that
goes off the back side of your school
it's not the one that goes down 316 your
other correct correct the P cook is the
one that goes back through which color
is it so it's the red going to the
purple the purple is the revised the red
is the existing Trail the purple is what
you have to do if you want to make grade
and make it something that's you know
walkable if any of you walked up that
rail trail you'll notice that's an
extremely tough walk uh to make an
impossible on a bike of any
sort the question here is will this
design study include what i' call cost
benefit analysis you were talking about
a project on the order of 1 mil and I'd
like to have some estimates about how
many
users uh daily monthly seasonal
basis you
know and I would hope that that would be
part of the design process to get that
information as part of public uh
Outreach second question is what
provision for public input in the design
process is
theion so one of the things that is an
absolute require M for D funding is
public engagement so there will be a
multiple meetings on this and a public
hearing on this prior to coming up with
a final
design
yeah so the red is that currently a
trail or is that just a proposed Trail
well it's a wooden it's a trail that we
keep walkable
okay and it's it's
marginally Mountain bikable until you
get to the Steep section now it's not
really ridable from you know the
last uh third of a mile basically is is
not really rival it's marginally
walkable um but not ridable in its
current state it was the Old Logging
Road for when they logged this property
so that's there now so if we um $100,000
goes to fun the design for the the
purple area or well but there's also if
you see the light blue those are those
are areas that are wetlands so there's
going to have to be some provision when
you're logging a
road you can be
less sensitive to wet Lings than you
have to be if you're putting a permanent
Trail so there's a bunch of design in
the other spots and there will also be a
fair bit of design when we get up into
this area because part of the the issue
we ran into is we developed a secondary
path to get to the Percy cook trail from
here so we could prevent people from
having to cross school property when the
Percy Trail was originally developed
which is going back maybe eight or nine
years and one of the issues that we had
with that is that this section
especially in years like this is
extremely wet so even though we have
permission from the gas line to cross in
a secondary spot that would this part
here would need to be improved too
because there is some some definite
Wetlands Crossings and wetlands impacts
there so that's a big part of the
there's a fairly big Wetland design
component to this to the design part
you're saying the project itself ever
came off in be over
million uh if we paid the whole thing
yes but you know any one mile Paving
project these days is you
know
sure so you said 950,000 may be required
for construction is the current estimate
was that a so you said maybe about two
years from now we might be able to apply
for grant money is that right sure and
is that going to also require about a 20
25% contribution from the town so it
depends I mean my goal would another
lsip grant part of the reason why I've
done it this way is in the reason why we
went after a legislative
Grant in the first place is it's often
harder to get design money than it is to
get actual construction money once
you've got essentially what they call a
shovel ready project where you have an
engineering design that you know the
especially the dot has blessed it is
easier then to actually fun construction
so which is exactly what we did with 316
we went after Congressional or
legislative money first used the
legislative money for a study in
preliminary
design went applied the lsip got the
lotet funding um in the first go around
which was pretty cool and um so that
project you know the town may have
20,000
$30,000 of skin in the game by the time
we develop it but the state will have
about 3 million so we funded almost the
whole cost of this my goal is to do the
same thing with this but I can't
guarantee it and obviously if I'm
standing up here in a couple years
asking you for $200,000 that's a much
bigger ask than the town and I recognize
that will lot of fund something up to
that amount yeah the
only my only hesitation with lots
is that uh right now the pipeline for
lots of funding is filled out at least
another five or six years so I don't
know when they're going to have another
lots of grant funding round available to
us um so that's kind of where I'm going
with
it I realiz it hasn't been entirely
designed car sure has entir designed
what's the WID you're envisioning you
know like two people walking a breast
yeah this will likely be a 10t I mean
kind of the the do federal do standard
for multi multi-use paths is a 10 foot
wide path and the C so again and you're
planning on pavement or something um
so the Steep part will absolutely be
paved the rest of it could be stone dust
and it could be P it's going to kind of
depend on what people want I don't have
any pre I like rid and gravel so I'd be
just as happy making it stone dust but
there is more
erosion you know maintenance costs are
slightly higher with gravel than with
pavement hi Doris M 33 c m road as a
person born with disabilities and it's
going to be Crossing in front of my
house um and my children's house uh I'm
concerned about the three foot of that
you mentioned um that's that's up the
code with the state and guidelines but
for a wheelchair accessibility for
accessibility walking it's a hazardous
Trail as it is right now I can't even um
leave my driveway because on C Road
people just rip zip right through away
right now as it is um so there are no um
uh stops on the road to prevent to slow
down so with this Trail and not being
all paved how are is the town going to
make sure Ure that it's not hazardous
that it's accessible to all of us um and
that it's it's it's a safe uh a safe
place to to walk or ride or have a
wheelchair access so first of all will
be unlike Cider Mill Road it will be
100% um non-motorized traffic so so you
know you won't have to worry about the
automobile component so the upper part
the part from the community center up
past where it says views and it starts
to go into the switch back that you can
make a really mild grade so you know if
you chose to pave it that whole section
can be fully ADA Compliant where we get
into the Steep section
just simply because you know you have
150 ft of elevation gain and you have it
in about a third of a mile no set of
switchbacks will make that fully uh Ada
accessible um and because there's no
Road there you can't apply proag
so the majority of this will be Ada
accessible but I I'm not saying the
whole thing well sorry um the the end
part starts going down the Steep part
will not
be I wish we could figure out how to
design it so that it would be but we
just we don't own enough land there in
enough way to make switchbacks to bring
the grade
down
mar9 why do we ex this do we know how
many people think they want to use this
I mean they could go out to the trail
anywhere there parking lots they've
developed all the way along the way why
do we think we need it from the
community CER
we use this path So my answer to that is
twofold um first that was something that
was identified in the last plan of
conservation and development that was
one of the goals which was linkage from
this the municipal complex to the rail
trail and then onto the ball fields um
down below so that's one component and
the second thing is I think think in
this day and age anything you can do to
Pro to promote healthy activity and
walking and biking is worthwhile for a
community and if you look at where the
youngest generation of people are moving
to you know there's a there is
a a large movement of people towards
areas that are walkable and bable um and
if we're going to people we're going to
attract young families that's got to be
part of the mix that we do as a
town but we really don't want to attract
people because of taxes most of the time
and the school says so and it's going to
cost 100,000 now and maybe up to a
million all public work projects are
expensive there's nothing you're doing
today that's
inexpensive so the Red Trail that we're
looking at tonight
with the paint attached to it that goes
down to the rail trail picking it up
near the museum uh no the museum is
closer to where the green trail
intercepts in fact the green trail
intercepts the green pathway intercepts
fairly close to where the museum is okay
and is that green trail uh the second
phase of this like tonight we're here
for 8300
approval of this with 21 because of the
red so correct there both of those
Trails both of those pathways are
proceeding down different funding
they're at different stages and they're
a different funding but both of those
grants were gotten we proposed in both
cases doing the opposite one to make it
a so we wrote that into both grants that
one of the objectives of this wasn't
complet what the yellow the yellow the
yellow is the existing Hot River State
State Park okay State Park the existing
rail trail
corre yeah I I also wonder if we really
need this we have lots of bike trails
already you've seen them this is a
potential boond of money be seeing in
the next couple years here in this town
with the um increase in the board of bed
budget School attendance um 20,000 it's
not that much but 200,000 would be this
is a the step in in that direction so
I'm not not sure we really need
this
16 the money you said is going to come
from uh existing building fund correct
I am assuming that what we talked about
here and there the building you know
that we're going to have a kitchen that
as soon as we clear to do it which means
you know pass a certain threshold after
it's occupy and whatever but correct cut
into
that uh it is not um that's part of the
reason well this is one of the reasons
why we've been funding the multi-use
building fund on an ongoing basis we did
put $50,000 into that in this budget
cycle so we have enough to cover that um
the other thing to keep in mind is that
we currently have a congressional
request for funding that made it through
the Senate Appropriations commission as
a two days ago um that will go a long
way towards
funding the second phase of what we're
doing with the community center so what
I'm trying to do is finish the community
center and the generator for the for the
three building complex out of mostly
federal funds so I'm actually not using
a lot of the multi-use building fund for
that no guarantees I'm going to get it
still got to go through but you know it
made it out of the the state funding
mechanism and it made it through the the
Senate Appropriations Committee so I
think it has a reasonable chance of
being funded
I just have a quick one is there a list
that we can look at anywhere that has a
list of um outstanding projects and
their cost so at least we know when
people are saying well this could be and
we we'd know what we're looking at
future for costs
and I mean I have a list I've have not
published that list okay but no reason
we can okay
um nothing Secret
uh Bob hamburger shotty m road I just
want to point out that as a town we
really have three town centers we have
the municipal Town Center here we have
the historic town center which is where
the railroad station was on Center
Street and we have the athletic Town
Center over where the fields are and we
have very little to connect them so that
somebody can walk or ride in between so
from my perspective anything that we can
do do to integrate this town so that
those Town centers can be easily
traversed by somebody on a bik of foot
is a good
idea Jeff valard Lake Road now when do
you expect to have a certificate of
occupancy on the seniors Community
Center uh last week last week now once
you get that certificate of occupany do
that close the door on a million dollar
budget
no it's still part of the I mean the
punch list and the final fees to the
contract are all fit in under that if uh
if we don't mind can we keep it to the
issues related to this Grant and this
application because that's what we're
here for initially in this town meeting
yeah my point being is that after a
period of time when that million doll
has done maybe the
$21,000 that the town is putting into
this be better SP on Senor center
community center that's my
opinion
okay sure I just want to remind
everybody that there was recently a
death on 316 a guy was on a motor on a
bicycle and U so someone who rides a
bicycle would love to utilize these
Trails I think it's a win I me I applaud
Eric for doing this work and getting
this Grant and U moving Our Town forward
like all the other towns are getting you
know with trails that go through the
town so that they go to different
areas that was sorry that
was and our roads you know when you try
to go down Lake Road which would
you could avoid it if you had that trail
a lot of times we try to go down Lake
Road to the Dollar General down there
and that's
dangerous are you looking for a motion
please
motion you can make a motion to vote on
this okay I we vot on this
proposal who second
okay motion has made second you came in
and checked in a paper bell yes no it's
if you Mar the Bell they'll come around
with bell Bo up
TR
[Music]
your bag any more bags
second
oh you get it get it got it got it thank
you
[Music]
spe
our they
that's
[Music]
motion is passed 39 yes to 19
no to this is order
[Music]